6.  NET Command Reference

This chapter contains the commands that are recognized by net.  In some 
cases some examples are given.  If there is further explanation in another 
chapter in this manual, there will be a pointer to it.  There are other 
places in the manual where commands are explained to demonstrate an 
example but we have attempted to collect them all here.

6.1.  Startup

When NET.EXE is executed without arguments, it attempts to open the file 
"AUTOEXEC.NET" in the directory specified by the environmental variable, 
NETHOME, or if that is undefined, in the root directory of the current 
drive.  If it exists, it is read and executed as though its contents were 
typed on the console as commands.  This feature is useful for setting the 
local IP address and host name, initializing the IP routing table, and 
starting the various Internet services.  If NET.EXE is invoked with an 
argument, it is taken to be the name of an alternate startup file; it is 
read instead of AUTOEXEC.NET.

6.2.  Console Mode

The console may be in one of two modes: command mode and converse mode.  
In command mode, the prompt "net>" is displayed and any of the commands 
described in the next section may be entered.  In converse mode, keyboard 
input is processed according to the "current session", which may be either 
a Telnet, FTP, or AX.25 connection.  In a telnet or AX.25 session, key- 
board input is sent to the remote system and any output from the remote 
system is displayed on the console.  In an FTP session, keyboard input is 
first examined to see if it is a known local command; if so it is executed 
locally.  If not, it is "passed through" to the remote FTP server.  (See 
the section titled "FTP Subcommands").

The keyboard also has "cooked" and "raw" states.  In cooked state, input 
is line-at-a-time.  See Chapter 3 for information on limited editing 
available while typing a line.  Hitting either return or line feed passes 
the complete line up to the application.  In raw mode, each character is 
immediately passed to the application as it is typed.  The keyboard is 
always in cooked state in command mode.  It is also cooked in converse 
mode on an AX25 or FTP session.  In a Telnet session it depends on whether 
the remote end has issued (and the local end has accepted) the Telnet 
"WILL ECHO" option.  (See the "echo" command).

On the IBM-PC, the user may escape back to command mode by hitting the F10 
key.  On other systems, the user must enter the "escape" character, which 
is by default control-] (hex 1d, ASCII GS).  (Note that this is distinct 
from the ASCII character of the same name).  On Non-MS-DOS systems, the 
escape character can be changed (see the "escape" command).  In Unix there 
is special use for the Ctrl-\.  See 3.8 for shell layer manager use.

6.3.  Commands - Syntax

This section describes each of the commands recognized while in command 
mode.  Note that certain FTP subcommands, e.g., put, get, dir, etc, are 
recognized only in converse mode with the appropriate FTP session; they 
are not recognized while in command mode.  The notation "<hostid>" denotes 
a host or gateway, which may be specified in one of two ways: as a 
symbolic name listed in the file "hosts.net", or as a numeric IP address 
in dotted decimal notation enclosed by brackets, e.g., [44.0.0.1].  Domain 
names can be used if they are explicitly included in hosts.net, for 
example, a line containing:

     44.78.0.2 k5jb k5jb.okla.ampr k5jb.ampr.org

or alternatively, multiple lines like:

     44.78.0.2  k5jb
     44.78.0.2  k5jb.okla.ampr
     44.78.0.2  k5jb.ampr.org

will permit your program to resolve any of these variations.  This is only 
needed when you are replying to mail that uses this long winded host name 
in the "From" field instead of a simple host name, like w1aw.

(In the most common option compiled into net, SOKNAME, the hosts.net file 
is read to convert socket names from IP addresses to names.  Either the 
third field of the first line where the IP address is found will be used 
as a name.  If there are less than three fields, the last field on the 
line will be used.)

Command syntax consists of the command followed by variable names enclosed 
in angle brackets or literals not so enclosed.  Square brackets enclose 
optional arguments.  The pipe "|" denotes an either-or selection.  
Example: hoot boot <scoot> [root] [shoot|loot] means to use the command 
"hoot"; followed by the mandatory argument, "boot"; followed by the 
mandatory argument variable scoot, which may be something like "50"; 
followed by the optional word "root"; followed by the option consisting of 
either the word "shoot" or "loot".  foo [<poo>] means the command "foo" 
can be followed by an optional argument variable, poo, which consists of 
the word "bar", so you would type either "foo" or "foo bar" to execute the 
command.

     Note: Commands issued at the net prompt are case sensitive, and are 
     all in lower case.
 
6.3.1.  <cr>

Entering a carriage return (empty line) while in command mode puts you in 
converse mode with the current session.  If there is no current session, 
net remains in command mode.

6.3.2.  ?

Entering a ? at the net prompt causes net to list all the commands 
available.

6.3.3.  !

An alias for the "shell" command (if compiled in).  See shell.

6.3.4.  #

Commands starting with the hash mark (#) are ignored.  This is mainly 
useful for comments in the AUTOEXEC.NET file.

6.3.5.  arp

With no arguments, displays the Address Resolution Protocol table that 
maps IP addresses to their subnet (link) addresses on subnetworks capable 
of broadcasting.  For each IP address entry the subnet type (e.g., 
Ethernet, AX.25), subnet address and time to expiration is shown.  If the 
link address is currently unknown, the number of IP datagrams awaiting 
resolution is also shown.

6.3.5.1.  arp add <hostid> ether|ax25|netrom <ether addr|callsign>

The add subcommand allows manual addition of address resolution entries 
into the table.  This is useful for "hard-wiring" digipeater paths, and 
other paths that are not directly resolvable.  Optional digipeater calls 
are added to the end of this line.

6.3.5.2.  arp drop <hostid> ether|ax25|netrom

The drop subcommand allows removal of entries from the table.

6.3.5.3.  arp publish <hostid> ether|ax25|netrom <ether addr|callsign>

The publish subcommand allows you to respond to arp queries for some other 
host.  This is commonly referred to as "proxy arp", and is considered a 
fairly dangerous tool.  The basic idea is that if you have two machines, 
one of which is on the air with a TNC, and the second one of which is 
connected to the first with a slip link, you might want the first machine 
to publish it's own AX.25 address as the right answer for arp queries 
addressing the second machine.  This way, the rest of the world doesn't 
know the second machine isn't really on the air.  Use arp publish with 
caution.

6.3.6.  attach <hwtype> <I/O addr> <vector> <mode> <label> <bufsize> <mtu>
     <speed>"

Configure and attach a hardware interface to the system.  <hw type> 
represents the kind of I/O device that is being attached.  The following 
types are some that are (somewhat) supported:

     asy Standard PC asynchronous interface using the National 8250
     combios (Undergoing test and development)
     drsi DRSI PC*PA PC Packet adapter
     kpc4 Kantronics KPC-4 and KAM dual port TNCs.
     netrom  (See 6.3.29.)
     packet FTP, Inc., compatible Packet Driver Interface 
     3c500 3Com 3C500 or 3C501 Ethernet interface 
     hapn Hamilton Amateur Packet Network adapter board (Intel 8273) 
     eagle Eagle Computer card (Zilog 8530) 
     pc100 PAC-COMM PC-100 (Zilog 8530)

Drsi and kpc4 hwtypes have different syntax from asy.  See examples below.  
The hapn, eagle and pc100 interfaces were not completed.  Driver code is 
not included in this package but is available from K5JB.

The drsi interface works fine, thank you!

<I/O address> is the base address of the control registers for the device.

<vector> is the interrupt vector number.  Both the address and the vector 
must be in hexadecimal.  (You may put "0x" in front of these two values if 
you wish, but note that they will be interpreted in hex even if you don't 
use it).

<mode> controls how IP datagrams are to be encapsulated in the device's 
link level protocol; i.e., it selects among several link protocols that 
may be available.  The choices here depend on the interface; at present, 
the 3c500 interface only supports mode "arpa", which uses standard ARPA-
style encapsulation.  (In the future, "802" may mean "use 802.3-style 
encapsulation").  Two modes for the "asy" device are currently supported:

slip Encapsulates IP datagrams directly in SLIP frames without a link 
     header.  This is for operation on point-to-point lines and is 
     compatible with 4.2BSD UNIX SLIP).

ax25 Similar to slip, except that an AX.25 header and a KISS TNC control 
     header are added to the front of the datagram before SLIP encoding.  
     Either UI (connectionless) or I (connection-oriented) AX.25 frames 
     can be used; see the "mode" command for details.

The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) maps IP to Ethernet addresses on 
Ethernet controllers and to AX.25 addresses on "asy" lines operating in 
"ax25" mode.

<label> gives the name by which the interface will be known to the various 
commands, such as "connect", "route" and "trace".

For asynchronous ports, <bufsize> specifies the size of the ring buffer in 
bytes to be statically allocated to the receiver; incoming bursts larger 
than this may (but not necessarily) cause data to be lost.  For Ethernet, 
<bufsize> specifies how many PACKETS may be queued on the receive queue at 
one time; if this limit is exceeded, further received packets will be 
discarded.  This is useful to prevent the system from running out of 
memory should another node suddenly develop a case of diarrhea.  <bufsize> 
is ignored in the Unix version.

<mtu> is the Maximum Transmission Unit size, in bytes.  Datagrams larger 
than this limit will be fragmented at the IP layer into smaller pieces.  
For AX.25 UI frames, this limits the size of the information field.  For 
AX.25 I frames, however, the ax25 paclen parameter is also relevant.  If 
the datagram or fragment is still larger than paclen, it is also 
fragmented at the AX.25 level (as opposed to the IP level) before 
transmission.  (See the "ax25 paclen" command for further information).

<speed> is needed only for an "asy" line; the controller will be 
initialized to the given speed.

Some examples follow.  The first is one to attach the PC asynch interface
normally known as "com1" (the first controller) to operate with a KISS TNC 
at 9600 baud, calling it "ax0".  A 1024 byte receiver ring buffer is 
allocated.  Outgoing packets larger than 256 bytes are fragmented.  Note 
that to run a typical TNC at over 4800 bps requires modifying it with high 
speed serial port components.

 attach asy 0x3f8 4 ax25 ax0 1024 256 9600

This example is to use the PC asynch card "com2" to operate in point-to-
point slip mode at 9600 baud, calling it "sl0".  A 1024 byte receiver ring 
buffer is allocated.  Outgoing packets larger than 256 bytes are 
fragmented.

 attach asy 0x2f8 3 slip sl0 1024 256 9600

(Note that you cannot use the second asynch controller ("com2") and a 3Com 
Ethernet card with standard addressing at the same time because they both 
use interrupt vector 3).

A Unix variation example does not use all the arguments but uses 0s as 
place holders in them.  This example is for /dev/tty14 running 4800 bps:

 attach asy 0 /dev/tty14 ax25 ax0 0 256 4800

If the DRSI driver has been compiled into net.exe, to attach DRSI PC*PA 
using address 0x300 and interrupt 7 (the printer interrupt) and sane 
buffer and packet sizes.  The label shown is "dr0" but in commands that 
need to refer to the logical port (label), refer to the first port as dr0a 
and the second as dr0b.

 attach drsi 0x300 7 ax25 dr0 512 256 1200

See 2.2.4. for full explanation of the DRSI driver.

If you are using the KPC-4, or KAM and if your net.exe was compiled with 
KPCPORT compiler directive defined in options.h, you will be able to use 
two radio ports while using only one serial port on the computer.  The 
"attach kpc4" command has a slightly different syntax.

 attach kpc4 <I/O addr> <vector> <label> <bufsize> <mtu> <speed>

Note that the mode argument is missing since only ax25 mode is available.

An example of using it in MS-DOS, using com1, 2k receive buffer, 256 byte 
max packet size, at 4800 bps on the serial port, would be:

 attach kpc4 0x3f8 4 kp0 2048 256 4800

The Unix version of the command, using /dev/tty14 at 4800 bps would be:

 attach kpc4 0 /dev/tty14 kp0 0 256 4800

(As in the drsi driver, subsequent commands will need reference to the 
first port as kp0a and the second as kp0b.)  Additional kpc4 drivers may 
be attached to other serial ports by using labels such as kp1, kp2, etc.

See 2.2.5. for a full explanation of the kpc4 driver and its operation.

Ethernet is not normally included in net.exe.  You have to compile it by 
enabling the necessary defines in config.h.  To attach a 3Com Ethernet 
controller using the standard 3Com address and vector (i.e., as it comes 
out of the box) to use ARPA-standard encapsulation.  The receive queue is 
limited to 5 packets, and outgoing packets larger than 1500 bytes will be 
fragmented:

 attach 3c500 0x300 3 arpa ec0 5 1500

6.3.6.1.  G8BPQ and NET

If you have version k20 or later, net with PACKET defined and compiled into
the executable, the FTP, Inc. packet driver will work with G8BPQ code.
I don't normally include it in the distribution net.exe.)  The attach line
in autoexec.net would looks something like:

 attach packet 0x61 ax0 5 256
 attach packet 0x62 ax1 5 256

Which would provide a direct port to the async port and a port to the BPQ 
code if you install the BPQ provided drivers prior to starting net.  Such 
a start would look like:

 nodedrv4 0x61 3 1
 nodedrv4 0x62 4 2

to provide communication to the net attach commands.

My test case defined one TNCPORT and two PORTs in bpqcfg.txt, the first 
one was COM=1, the computer's COM1 port, and the two PORT entries were 
TYPE=ASYNC for the async port connected to the KISS TNC and the second one 
was TYPE= INTERNAL for the connection between the packet driver and the 
BPQ code.  My experiments with BPQ were limited so you will have to find 
what you can in the BPQ doc (whew!).  If you want a version with PACKET 
defined, contact me (K5JB) and I will provide it along with the 
configuration and startup files that worked for me.  (The COMBIOS scheme 
described by G8BPQ doesn't work with net.exe because it doesn't have 
COMBIOS interface included, or didn't until I started experimenting with 
it.)

6.3.7.  ax25

6.3.7.1.  ax25 digipeat [on|off]

Controls whether AX.25 packets addressed to this station as a digipeater 
will be repeated.  

6.3.7.1.1  ax25 heard [on|off|clear]

If compiled with the directive AX25_HEARD defined, this command is 
available to list the (currently 19) most recent heard source stations 
sending info frames.  Likewise, a "jheard" would also be available to 
AX.25 mailbox users.  Each displayed line shows the interface name, time, 
aggregate of Layer 3 protocols used by that source call and the callsign 
string from the most recent header.  Creates file, heard.hlp. 

6.3.7.2.  ax25 maxframe [<val]>]

Establishes the maximum number of frames that will be allowed to remain 
unacknowledged at one time on new AX.25 connections.  This number cannot 
be greater than 7.  Recommend they be kept down to 1 or 2.  Default is 1.

6.3.7.3.  ax25 mycall [<call>]

Display or set the local AX.25 address.  The standard format is used, 
e.g., KA9Q-0 or WB6RQN-5.  This command must be given before any attach 
command using AX.25 mode are given.

6.3.7.4.  ax25 mboxcall [<call>]

Same as mycall, but sets the callsign of the AX.25 mailbox.  This sub- 
command is accessible when you compile net with SID2 defined.  An AX.25 
user connecting to mboxcall gets a prompt without having to send an info 
frame. If mboxcall is undefined the user must use mycall instead.  Don't
set mboxcall to the same as mycall if you are going to use Net/ROM.

6.3.7.5.  ax25 paclen [<val>]

Limits the size of I-fields on new AX.25 connections.  Note that if IP 
datagrams or fragments larger than this are transmitted, they will be 
transparently fragmented at the AX.25 level, sent as a series of I frames, 
and reassembled back into a complete IP datagram or fragment at the other 
end of the link.  This parameter should be less than (or equal to) the MTU 
of the associated interface.  Default is 256.

6.3.7.6.  ax25 pthresh [<val>]

Sets the threshold packet size beyond which the packet will be re-sent 
rather than send a Poll when the retry time has expired without an ack.  
Only set this to zero if you are using NET/ROM.  Default is 128.

6.3.7.7.  ax25 reset <axcb>

Deletes the AX.25 connection control block at the specified address.  Axcb 
is the address in memory of a control block.  On a Unix machine it is 
necessary to type all 8 hex numbers.  On an MS-DOS machine, the last 4 
will do.  Get this number with the ax25 stat command.  (In C, the 
operator, &, is "address of").

6.3.7.8.  ax25 retry [<val>]

Limits the number of successive unsuccessful retransmission attempts on 
new AX.25 connections.  If this limit is exceeded, link re-establishment 
is attempted.  If this fails "retry" times, then the connection is 
abandoned and all queued data is deleted.  Default is 10.

6.3.7.9.  ax25 status [<axcb>]

Without an argument, displays a one-line summary of each AX.25 control 
block.  If the address of a particular control block is specified, the 
contents of that control block are dumped in more detail.  Note that the 
send queue units are frames, while the receive queue units are bytes.

6.3.7.10.  ax25 t1|t2|t3|T4 [<val>]

Display or set the AX.25 timers to be used for new connections.  T1 is the 
retransmission timer (frack), T2 is the acknowledgment delay timer (resp- 
time) and T3 is the idle "keep alive" (check) timer.  T4 is the dormant 
circuit timer which disconnects a circuit that has been idle for this 
period.  Values of T1-T3 are in milliseconds, T4 is in seconds.  If you 
are using netrom, it is best to set T3 to 0 to prevent unnecessary 
polling.  (Some NET/ROMs are set to not poll and to maintain permanent 
connections.  See Chapter 5 for explanation of the effect this has on mbox 
connections.)  Defaults: t1 = 10,000, t2 = 1,000, t3 = 0, t4 = 900 sec.

6.3.7.11.  ax25 window [<val>]

Sets the number of bytes that can be pending on an AX.25 receive queue 
beyond which I frames will be answered with RNR (Receiver Not Ready) 
responses.  This presently applies only to suspended interactive AX.25 
sessions, since incoming IP datagrams are always processed immediately and 
not allowed to remain on the receive queue.  Default is 2048.  If third 
party networking with defective fragmentation is encountered, set ax25 win 
to 1280.

6.3.8.  cd [<directory path>]

Same as respective MS-DOS or Unix command.  In MS-DOS, Shows current dir-
ectory, or with an argument permits changing to another path.  In Unix,
cd without argument changes net to its home directory, otherwise changes
to the specified path.

6.3.9.  close [<session #>]

On an AX.25 session, this command initiates a disconnect.  On a FTP or 
Telnet session, this command sends a FIN (i.e., initiates a close) on the 
session's TCP connection.  This is an alternative to asking the remote 
server to initiate a close ("QUIT" to FTP, or the logout command 
appropriate for the remote system in the case of Telnet).  When either FTP 
or Telnet sees the incoming half of a TCP connection close, it 
automatically responds by closing the outgoing half of the connection.  
Close is more graceful than the "reset" command, in that it is less likely 
to leave the remote TCP in a "half-open" state.

6.3.10.  connect <interface> <callsign> [<digipeater> ...  ]

Initiates a "vanilla" AX.25 session to the specified call sign using the 
specified interface.  Up to 8 optional digipeaters may be given; note that 
the word "via" MUST NOT be included, unless you want to connect to a 
station with the callsign, "via".  Data sent on this session goes out in 
conventional AX.25 packets with no upper layer protocol.  The de-facto 
presentation standard format is used, in that each packet holds one line 
of text, terminated by a carriage return.  A single AX.25 connection may 
be used for both terminal-to-terminal and IP traffic, with the two types 
of data being automatically separated by their AX.25 Level 3 Protocol IDs.

6.3.11.  dir [<dirname>] [/w]

List the contents of the specified directory on the console.  If no 
argument is given, the current directory is listed.  Shows the directory 
in two columns with file sizes, dates, and times.  If the optional /w 
switch is used (wide) it shows the file names only, in five columns.

6.3.12.  disconnect [<session #>]

An alias for the "close" command (for the benefit of AX.25 users).

6.3.13.  echo [accept|refuse]

Displays or changes the flag controlling client Telnet's response to a 
remote WILL ECHO offer.

The Telnet presentation protocol specifies that in the absence of a 
negotiated agreement to the contrary, neither end echoes data received 
from the other.  In this mode, a Telnet client session echoes keyboard 
input locally and nothing is actually sent until a carriage return is 
typed.  Local line editing is also performed: backspace deletes the last 
character typed, while control-U deletes the entire line.

When communicating from keyboard to keyboard the standard local echo mode 
is used, so the setting of this parameter has no effect.  However, many 
time-sharing systems (e.g., UNIX) prefer to do their own echoing of typed 
input.  (This makes screen editors work right, among other things).  Such 
systems send a Telnet WILL ECHO offer immediately upon receiving an 
incoming Telnet connection request.  If "echo accept" is in effect, a 
client Telnet session will automatically return a DO ECHO response.  In 
this mode, local echoing and editing is turned off and each key stroke is 
sent immediately (subject to the Nagle tinygram algorithm in TCP).  While 
this mode is just fine across an Ethernet, it is clearly inefficient and 
painful across slow paths like packet radio channels.  Specifying "echo 
refuse" causes an incoming WILL ECHO offer to be answered with a DONT 
ECHO; the client Telnet session remains in the local echo mode.  Sessions 
already in the remote echo mode are unaffected.  (Note: Berkeley Unix has 
a bug in that it will still echo input even after the client has refused 
the WILL ECHO offer.  To get around this problem, enter the "stty -echo" 
command to the shell once you have logged in.)

6.3.14.  eol [unix|standard]

Displays or changes Telnet's end-of-line behavior when in remote echo 
mode.  In standard mode, each key is sent as-is.  In unix mode, carriage 
returns are translated to line feeds.  This command is not necessary with 
all UNIX systems; use it only when you find that a particular system 
responds to line feeds but not carriage returns.  Only Sun UNIX release 
3.2 seems to exhibit this behavior; later releases are fixed.

6.3.15.  escape <char>

Without arguments, displays the current command-mode escape character in 
hex.  If given an argument, the first character becomes the new escape 
character.  (This command is not provided on the IBM-PC; on the PC, the 
escape char is always F10.  In the Unix version, the escape character 
defaults to Ctrl-].)

6.3.16.  etherstat

Display 3-Com Ethernet controller statistics (if configured).

6.3.17.  exit

Exit the "net" program and return to MS-DOS (or Unix).

6.3.18.  finger [<user|user@host|@host>]

The Finger Server is a process that is optionally compiled into net.  It 
uses files that reside in a finger directory.  If you use environmental 
variables, finger will look for a subdirectory, finger, in the NETHOME 
directory (normally \net).  If you don't use environmental variables it 
will look for its files a subdirectory, called, \finger, off of root.  In 
either case, put files with names consisting of user names followed by 
".txt".  For example, finger file for user k5jb would be called k5jb.txt.  
There could be a file called all.txt containing information about all the 
local IP stations.

There are forms of the finger command:
     finger user
     finger user@host
     finger @host
Using host station k5jb as an example, if someone does, 
     finger @k5jb
his program responds with something to the effect:

   Known users at k5jb:
      k5jb
      all
      ...

Then, if he sends, finger all@k5jb, the program sends the contents of 
all.txt to him.  You can see the results of the finger command on your own 
system by doing, finger @your_hostname, or finger someone@your_hostname, 
to see what your files look like to someone else.  I use the all.txt to 
hold all the current IP addresses I have assigned in the local area.

6.3.19.  ftp <hostid>

Open an FTP control channel to the specified remote host and enter 
converse mode on the new session.  "ftp w1aw" initiates an ftp session 
with host w1aw.  You will be prompted for your user name and password.  If 
you get either of these wrong the program will loop until you either get 
it right or escape to the command prompt and close the session.  (F-10 on 
MS-DOS or the defined escape key in Unix to get to the command prompt.)

When in converse mode with an FTP server, everything typed on the console 
is first examined to see if it is a locally-known command.  If not, the 
line is passed intact to the remote server on the control channel.  If it 
is one of the following commands, however, it is executed locally.  (Note 
that this generally involves other commands being sent to the remote 
server on the control channel.)  When actively transferring a file, the 
only acceptable command is "abort"; all other commands will result in an 
error message.  Responses from the remote server are displayed directly on 
the screen.

Most of the ftp commands follow:

6.3.19.1.  abort    {ftp command}

Aborts a get, put or dir operation in progress.  When receiving a file, 
abort simply resets the data connection; the next incoming data packet 
will generate a TCP RST (reset) in response which will clear the remote 
server.  When sending a file, abort sends a premature end-of-file.  Note 
that in both cases abort will leave a partial copy of the file on the 
destination machine, which must be removed manually if it is unwanted.  
Abort is valid only when a transfer is in progress.

6.3.19.2.  cd <directory>    {ftp command}

Changes directory on the host computer.  You have to have permission to 
change to the target directory.  (See information on the ftpusers file in 
Chapter 2.)  If, for example you send cd /public,  The system will respond 
with, 257 "\public" is current directory.  You can use / or \ as a 
directory separator, the native system will respond with it's separator.

6.3.19.3.  cwd [<directory>]    {ftp command}

Similar to cd, except does not require an argument.  If no argument is 
given it displays current directory path.  Also see pwd.

6.3.19.4.  dele <remotefile>    {ftp command}

Deletes remotefile on the host machine, if you have destroy permission.

6.3.19.5.  dir <remote directory/file> [<local filename>]    {ftp command}

Dir is the long directory command, as compared to ls which is the short 
one.  Without arguments, "dir" requests that a full directory listing of 
the remote server's current directory be sent to the terminal.  If one 
argument is given, this is passed along in the LIST command; this can be a 
specific file or sub-directory that is meaningful to the remote file 
system.  If two arguments are given, the second is taken as the local file 
into which the directory listing should be put (instead of being sent to 
the console).  Over the control channel, the PORT command is used before 
the LIST command is sent.  See list command which acts the same as the dir 
command.

.pa
6.3.19.6.  get <remote_file> [<local_file>]    {ftp command}

Asks the remote server to send the file specified in the first argument.  
The second argument, if given, will be the name of the file on the local 
machine; otherwise it will have the same name as on the remote machine.  
The PORT and RETR commands are sent on the control channel.  (If you just 
want to read a text file, you can use "con" as the local file name on MS-
DOS machine, or if using Unix, use your tty port, e.g. /dev/tty12.  Get 
will open a file to your display and send the file contents there.)

6.3.19.7.  list - see dir    {ftp command}

6.3.19.8.  ls <remote directory/file> [<local filename>]    {ftp command}

Ls is the abbreviated directory command.  Ls is identical to the "dir" 
command except that the "NLST" command is sent to the server instead of 
the "LIST" command.  This results in an abbreviated directory listing, 
i.e., one showing only the file names themselves without any other 
information.  You must have read permission for that directory set.

6.3.19.9.  mkdir <remote_directory>    {ftp command}

Creates a directory on the remote machine.  You must have write permission 
in the target directory.

6.3.19.10.  pass <password>    {ftp command}

Automatically used by ftp client over the control channel after it sends 
the user command.  Your client queries you for user name and password and 
makes the request to the target's server.  If you want to change to a 
different user after logging in, you follow the user command with this 
command.

6.3.19.11.  put <local_file> [<remote_file>]    {ftp command}

Asks the remote server to accept data, creating the file named in the 
first argument.  The second argument, if given, will be the name of the 
file on the remote machine; otherwise it will have the same name as on the 
local machine.  The PORT and STOR commands are sent on the control 
channel.  You must have write permission in the target directory.

Here is an example where I established ftp session with my own computer.  
I have only read write permission in \net.  I put a file, deleteme in \net 
using get.  (I have full permission on my own computer) with:
 
     get \net\finger\all.txt \net\deleteme

Then tried to delete it on the host.  (I am currently in \net):

     del deleteme
     550 Permission denied

.pa
Then I try to overwrite it:

     put \net\finger\all.txt \net\deleteme
     200 Port command okay
     550 Permission denied
     Put aborted

It failed because it couldn't first delete the existing file named 
deleteme.  (Note that "/" could have been used in this instance instead of 
"\".)

6.3.19.12.  pwd    {ftp command}

Abbreviation for "print working directory".  Acts same as cd without an 
argument.  Doesn't change working directory; only shows it.

6.3.19.13.  quit    {ftp command}

Quit command is used to gracefully close an FTP session.

6.3.19.14.  rmdir <remote_directory>    {ftp command}

Deletes a directory on the remote machine.  You must have destroy 
permission for its parent directory, and it must be empty.

6.3.19.15.  type [a|i|l<bytesize>]    {ftp command}

Tells both the local client and remote server the type of file that is to 
be transferred.  The default is 'a', which means ASCII (i.e., a text 
file).  Type length lines of text in ASCII separated by cr/lf sequences; 
in IMAGE mode, files are sent exactly as they appear in the file system.  
ASCII mode should be used whenever transferring text between dissimilar 
systems (e.g., UNIX and MS-DOS) because of their different end-of-line 
and/or end-of-file conventions.  When exchanging text files between 
machines of the same type, either mode will work but IMAGE mode may be 
somewhat faster.

Important Note:  When exchanging raw binary files (executables, com- 
pressed archives, etc) IMAGE mode must be used.  It is easy to forget to 
issue the "type i" command when starting an FTP session.

Type 'l' (logical byte size) is used when exchanging binary files with 
remote servers having oddball word sizes (e.g., DECSYSTEM-10s and 20s).  
Locally it works exactly like IMAGE, except that it notifies the remote 
system how large the byte size is.  <bytesize> is typically 8.  If you 
use l, without the bytesize argument, it will switch to image and report 
an error.  The type command sets the local transfer mode and generates 
the TYPE command on the control channel.

6.3.19.16.  user <username>    {ftp command}

User command is automatically sent by your client during a logon process.  
If you want to change user after logging in you use this command.

.pa
6.3.20.  help [<subject>]

Display a file, a page at a time, with an opportunity to abort at each 
page break.  The default file, net.hlp, must be an ASCII file, and must 
reside in your home directory (set NETHOME=c:/net, for example).  If you 
don't have this environmental variable set, net.hlp must be in root.  At 
each page break, from MS-DOS, quit with F10, or with Unix, quit by using 
the defined escape character (default Ctrl-]).  If the optional argument 
is used, help will read other files that you have prepared.  For example, 
help ftp, will read the file, ftp.hlp in the net home directory.  I 
suggest you put in your net.hlp the names of other help files you created.

6.3.21.  hostname [<name>]

Displays or sets the local host's name (an ASCII string such as "ka9q- 
pc", NOT an IP address).  Currently this is used only in the greeting 
messages from the SMTP (mail) and FTP (file transfer) servers.

6.3.22.  log [stop|<file>]

Without arguments, indicates whether server sessions are being logged.  If 
"stop" is given as the argument, logging is terminated (the servers 
themselves are unaffected).  If a file name is given as an argument, 
server session log entries will be appended to it.

6.3.23.  ip

The ip subcommands follow:

6.3.23.1.  ip address [<hostid>]

Displays or sets the local IP address.

6.3.23.2.  ip status [clear]

Has been made to do triple duty.  It displays some SLIP/KISS information 
on the first line.  Slip balks are events where a TNC is stifled from 
transmitting (by continuous on frequency carriers) and outgoing packets 
queue excessively.  If the queue exceeds eight, slip balks is incremented.  
Current queue high water mark is shown with the limit as a fraction, e.g. 
2/8.  Bad receive frames are slip frames that arrive with no control byte 
and are discarded.  RXOruns are receiver overruns on the serial port.  
Baud rate is too high for speed of computer.  The second line displays 
Internet Protocol (IP) statistics, such as total packet counts and error 
counters of various types.  IP status also displays statistics about the 
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), including the number of ICMP 
messages of each type sent or received.  Optional argument, clear, zeroes 
kiss stats.

6.3.23.3.  ip ttl [<val>]

Displays or sets the default time-to-live value placed in each outgoing IP 
datagram.  This limits the number of switch hops the datagram may take.  
The idea is to bound the lifetime of the packet should it become caught in 
a routing loop,

6.3.24.  kport [0|1] (deleted and replaced by attach kpc4, Sect. 6.3.6.)

6.3.24.1.  mail [<hostname>] [<pages to skip>]

A simple pager that paws through your mailfile, e.g. \spool\mail\k5jb.txt, 
and displays it a page at a time, without interrupting operation of net as 
shelling to bm would do.  It defaults to your hostname, up to the first 
dot.  If you save mail files by renaming them as I do, you can add the 
optional hostname argument, e.g. mail k5jb1, and it would look for 
\spool\mail\k5jb1.txt.  Second arg is a number.  If used, it causes mail 
to skip that number of screens (22 lines each) before it displays.  To use 
the second arg you must supply the first arg (your hostname).  You abort 
mail scanning with your defined escape.

6.3.25.  mbox [ y|n|?| s [<message>] ]

Y (or On) and N (or off) enable and disable the AX.25 mailbox.  ? returns 
the on-off status.  S is used to send a message to a user who is connected 
to the mbox.  If you use, "mbox s", one line is sent to a mail box user 
prior to the next prompt string.  This line is, "I'm at the console.  If 
you want to chat, send a "c"."  Alternatively, if you use, "mbox s Hey!  I 
got your message!", when the mailbox sends its next prompt it will preceed 
it with the string you typed after the "s", then send the "I'm at the 
console..." line.  The message can be up to 79 characters long.  This 
command is not aware that the mbox is multiuser, and if more than one user 
is connected, your string will be sent to the next user getting a prompt.

If mbox is enabled, an incoming AX.25 or NET/ROM connection is routed to 
the mbox.  If mbox is disabled, the connection is routed to an AX.25 
terminal session.  Mbox, without arguments, shows status of those 
connected to the mbox.  There is a ten minute idle timer that is reset 
with each incoming information frame from each user.  The time remaining 
(ms) is shown in the last column of the display.  A typical display would 
be:

     net> mbox
      User       State    Type    &cb     ms left
      kb0qj      DATA     NET/ROM 0x6ce8  400000

It shows that kb0qj is connected and is in the DATA state, using NET/ROM 
and has 400 seconds before inactivity Time-out.  (Time-out is reset with 
each incoming data frame to 10 minutes.)  The &cb field is the address of 
the control block related to this session.

Users have a set of commands.  They are explained in section 5.4.

6.3.26.  memstat

Displays the internal free memory list in the storage allocator.  Not 
implemented in the Unix version.  (There is exhaustive memory debugging 
code available if you compile with debugging switches set in alloc.c and 
mbuf.c.)

6.3.27.  mode <interface> [vc|datagram]

Controls the default transmission mode on the specified AX.25 interface.  
In "datagram" mode, IP packets are encapsulated in AX.25 UI frames and 
transmitted without any other link level mechanisms, such as connections 
or acknowledgments.  See Chapter 5 for more explanation of the virtual 
circuit and datagram modes.

6.3.28.  mulport [on|off]

The multiport switch software allows routing of frames between interfaces 
based on a table lookup.  This provides the traditional "multi-port 
digipeater" functionality.  (Only if compiled into the code.  If it is, 
"Mulport" will show in the startup header.)  See Chapter 5 for information 
on how to use the GRAPES Multiport code.

6.3.29.  NET/ROM Commands

NET/ROM transport sessions are very much like those for AX.25.  You can 
use the disconnect, reset, kick, upload, and record commands, and the 
session command to switch sessions.  The netrom commands follow.

     Note:  Although it is not a netrom command, the "arp add" command 
     must be used before you can use the above session commands with 
     another host that depends on NET/ROM transport.  Also, the "attach 
     netrom" command must be used before the following commands.

     Note: If you want to set the ax25 paclen used by NET/ROM to something 
     less than 256, first use the ax25 paclen command to set the desired 
     value, then after you have used the attach netrom command you can 
     restore the ax25 paclen to its final value.

6.3.29.1.  netrom acktime [<value>]

This is the acknowledge delay timer, similar to ax25 t2.  The default is 
3000 ms.  Without argument, this command shows current value.

6.3.29.2.  netrom bcnodes <iface name>

This command kicks the node broadcast to announce that you are on the air.  
The interface name would be for example, "ax0", over which you want to 
send the broadcast.  Do this for every interface on which you want to send 
broadcasts.  If you put this command in your autoexec.net (startup.net) 
file, whenever you restart NET, it will send out nodes broadcasts to tell 
the local nodes that you are available.

6.3.29.2.1.  netrom bcstifle <iface name> 0|1

For applications where you want to make special routings and need to 
prevent (stifle) node broadcasts altogether, use this command with the 
last arg equal to 1.  It is defaulted to 0 when the attach interface 
command is used.

6.3.29.3.  netrom connect <alias|callsign>

Netrom connect is used to make a NET/ROM protocol connection to a 
destination station.  Either the alias or call sign can be used.

6.3.29.4.  netrom choketime [<value>]

The time to wait before breaking a send choke condition.  Choke is the 
term for NET/ROM flow control.  Without argument, this command gives 
current value.  Default is 180000 ms (3 minutes).

6.3.29.5.  netrom interface <iface name> <node alias> <qual>

Typically interface name is ax0, but if using DRSI PC*PA it could be dr0a, 
or some such.  The second argument is the alias of your node, to be used 
in your routing broadcasts.  The alias is never used for anything else.  
Typically a "#" pound sign is used if you want the node alias to not 
appear in casual inquiries.  If you do, one style is to make up a number 
consisting of hex representation of the latter part of your IP address.  
For example, 44.78.0.2 would be 4E0002.  (78 is 4E hex and all amateur 
radio IP addresses start with 44 so it is assumed.)  The last number is 
the NET/ROM quality figure.  The quality value is important only if you 
are using NET/ROM as a switch.  If this is the case, coordinate it's value 
with other NET/ROM stations in the network.  In a well-coordinated network 
its value will typically be about 80.  In an unmanaged network, its 
quality will typically be around 192.  If you are only an end point on the 
NET/ROM network, and not transmitting route information, make the quality 
anything you want.  If you make it 255 you can see what the quality values 
are when broadcast by your neighbors.

You need a netrom interface command for every interface you're going to 
use with NET/ROM.  You must use the netrom interface command before using 
the other netrom commands.  See 6.3.48.3. if using a pseudo iface for VC.

6.3.29.6.  netrom irtt [<value>]

The initial round trip time guess, used for timer setting.  Default is 
15000.  Without argument, this command gives current value.

The netrom kick command causes an immediate send retry on the indicated 
control block.  &nrcb is address of the netrom control block.  It can be 
obtained from the netrom status command.

6.3.29.8.  netrom nodefilter [<add|drop> <call> <iface>]

Sometimes you can hear broadcasts from nodes that can't hear you.  Your 
routing table will be full of junk and your memory wasted with unusuable 
routes.  To prevent this, pick one good neighbor NET/ROM node and use the 
netrom nodefilter command in conjunction with the netrom nodefilter mode 
command.  The nodefilter list contains a list of callsigns and interfaces.  
The filter mode, controls what to do with the list.

Netrom nodefilter is used to create or manage the list of calls used by 
the netrom nodefilter mechanism.  If no argument is given, netrom node- 
filter displays calls and associated interfaces in its list. See Para. 
6.3.48.3. if you use the pseudo virtual circuit interface.

.pa
6.3.29.9.  netrom nodefilter mode [none|accept|reject]

If the filter mode is "none", no filtering is done.  If it is "accept", 
then only broadcasts from the indicated stations on the indicated 
interfaces are accepted.  If it is "reject", then all broadcasts except 
those from the listed stations on the listed interfaces are accepted.  If 
no argument is given, shows current mode.

6.3.29.10.  netrom nodetimer [<value>]

Netrom node broadcast interval timer in seconds is used for the value.  
Typical value is 3600, or one hour.

If your local NET/ROM nodes broadcast every hour, but you want to do so 
every ten minutes, you can say:

   netrom nodetimer 600

It has been found that a value of 1740 is good with typical netrom setups.  
Without argument, shows current value and value at which it will send 
netrom broadcast.

6.3.29.11.  netrom obsotimer [<value>]

Obsolescence timer value is in seconds.  Typical value is 3600.  Every 
time the obsotimer kicks, the obsolescence counts for all non-permanent 
entries are decremented by one.  When the count for an entry falls below 
five, it is no longer broadcast.  When it falls to 0, it is removed.  The 
count is initialized at 6.

6.3.29.12.  netrom qlimit [<value>]

The maximum length of the receive queue for chat sessions.  This is 
similar to ax25 window.  Default is 2048.

6.3.29.13.  netrom reset <&nrcb>

Causes unilateral reset (disc) of the netrom session having a control 
block at address &nrcb.  Obtain this address with the netrom status 
command.  Reset does not tell the neighbor netrom of the reset.  On 
receipt of an I frame from that node, your station will send DM.

6.3.29.14.  netrom retries [<value>]

Sets maximum retries on connect, disconnect, and data frames.  Without 
argument, this command returns current value.  Default is 10.

6.3.29.11.  netrom route

Use netrom route to see the contents of your routing table.

6.3.29.12.  netrom route add <alias> <dest> <iface> <qual>
                          <neighbor> [<digi ... >]

.pa
Netrom add adds a permanent entry to the routing table.  An example is:

     netrom route add #foo w9foo ax0 192 w9rly

This command adds an entry for w9foo, whose alias is #foo, route quality 
192, via w9rly on interface ax0.  Let's talk about what this means.  w9foo 
is the *destination* node, the one to whom you want the packets routed by 
the NET/ROM network.  w9rly is your *neighbor*, the NET/ROM node to which 
you pass the packet to be forwarded.  Since w9rly may appear on more than 
one interface (the callsign may be used by more than one NET/ROM node on 
different bands), we specify that we are to use ax0 to send the packet.

With NET/ROM, like IP, we don't know exactly what route a packet will take 
to its destination.  We only know the name of a neighbor which has 
indicated a willingness to forward that packet (of course, the neighbor 
may be the destination itself, but that's unlikely in our application).  
NET/ROM sends the packet to the neighbor, with a network header specifying 
our callsign and that of the ultimate destination (in this case w9foo).

We can use the netrom route add command to establish a digipeater path to 
the neighbor.  For example:

     netrom route add #foo w9foo ax0 192 w9rly wd9igi

This will cause us to use wd9igi as a digipeater in establishing our 
connection to the NET/ROM node w9rly.

Note that "route add" and "netrom route add" are two different commands, 
with different purposes.  In general, you only need a "netrom route add" 
if you need to add a route to a NET/ROM node via a digipeater path.  If 
you find yourself using this command, ask yourself, "Why am I doing this?"  
Also, it is a bad idea to hard wire a route to an intermittent TCP/IP 
station that is using NET/ROM emulation.  When he goes off the air, your 
station will try anyway and cause the NET/ROM stations to send hundreds of 
packets trying to connect to it.  His neighbor NET/ROM station will be the 
most severely stimulated.  If a station is going to be intermittent it is 
better to use ARP instead of NET/ROM, and if not possible, let the 
automatic table management deal with the routing.

6.3.29.13.  netrom route drop <dest> <neighbor> <iface>

To drop the route to w9foo, you would type

     netrom route drop w9foo w9rly ax0

6.3.29.14.  netrom route info <dest>

Use netrom route info kb0qj-10 to see the routing entries for a station in 
your routing table with the call kb0qj-10.  You may not use an alias as an 
argument to the netrom route info command.

6.3.29.15.  netrom status [<&nrcb.]

When used without argument, returns status of any netrom circuits active.  
It shows address of the control block, the send window, the send queue, 
the receive queue, the local user, the remote user, the node to which the 
user is connected, and the state of the connection.

This command displays the status of all NET/ROM connections, which will 
include those used in keyboard sessions as well as ones attached to the 
mailbox.

When the control block address is given, where <&nrcb> is the hex address 
given in the short form of the command, or in the "session" display, you 
can get more detailed information on a session.

6.3.29.16.  netrom ttl [<value>]

The "netrom ttl" command allows setting of the time-to-live initializer 
for NET/ROM datagrams.  Recommend value is 16.  Without argument, shows 
current value.

The purpose of the ttl initializer is to prevent a packet from getting 
caught forever in routing loops.  Every router who handles the packet 
decrements the ttl field of the network datagram before sending it on, and 
when it reaches 0 it is discarded.

6.3.29.17.  netrom verbose [<yes|no>]

By default, the NET/ROM code does not broadcast the contents of your 
routing table.  This is as it should be, since usually we just want to be 
the endpoints of communications rather than relaying NET/ROM traffic.  If 
you want to be a switch station, include the command netrom verbose yes in 
your autoexec.  Without argument, netrom verbose give state of the 
command.

6.3.29.18.  netrom window [<value>]

Maximum sliding window size, negotiated down at connect time.  Default 
initial value is 4.  If no argument, this command returns current value.

6.3.30.  param <interface> [<param>]

Param invokes a device-specific control routine.  On a KISS TNC interface, 
this sends control packets to the TNC.  Data bytes are treated as decimal.  
For example, "param ax0 1 255" will set the keyup timer (type field = 1) 
on the KISS TNC configured as ax0 to 2.55 seconds (255 x .01 sec).  To get 
a TNC out of the KISS mode, the command, param ax0 255 will do the 
equivalent of telling it to return to the routine that put it in KISS.

See 8.1.4. for full explanation of KISS params.

On a SLIP interface, the param command allows the baud rate to be read 
(without arguments) or set.  The implementation of this command for the 
various interface drivers (except DRSI) is incomplete and subject to 
change.

.pa
The following array contains startup defaults for the DRSI driver.  If you 
want to change them, use the param n number, where n is the position in 
the array, 0 being the first:

      hp->params[TXDELAY] = 30;               /* 300 Ms */
      hp->params[PERSIST] = 64;               /* 25% persistence */
      hp->params[SLOTIME] = 10;               /* 100 Ms */
      hp->params[SQUELDELAY] = 10;            /* was 200 Ms */
      hp->params[ENDDELAY] = 10;              /* 100 Ms */

For example, param dr0a 0 40, changes TXD on channel 0 to 400 ms.

6.3.31.  ping [ [<hostname> [<interval>] ] | clear ]

Ping stimulates a response from "hostname".  The command, ping k5jb, 
causes a response like:

     net> 44.78.0.2: echo reply id 0 seq 124, 55 ms

which indicates the round trip time was 55 ms.  (This was a ping of the 
host running net, and is the smallest time interval in an MS-DOS computer.  
Other computers would show a different value.)

The command, ping n5lxs 3600, would start a continuous ping, repeating 
every 3600 seconds (1 hour).  Then nine hours later, the command, ping, 
would show something like:

     Host                Sent    Rcvd   %   Avg RTT  Interval
     44.78.0.34             9       9 100      9698      3600

The command, ping clear, would stop the repeated pinging.

6.3.32.  pwd [<dirname>]

Unix version only, an abbreviation for "print working directory".  Shows 
net's current directory.  Use the "cd" command to change directory.

6.3.33.  record [<filename>|off]

Opens <filename> and appends to it all data received on the current 
session.  Data sent on the current session is also written into the file 
except for Telnet sessions in remote echo mode.  The command "record off" 
stops recording and closes the file.  This command is not supported for 
FTP sessions.

6.3.34.  reset [<session>]

If an argument is given, reset forces a local reset (deletion) of the 
AX.25 (AXCB) or TCP Control Block (TCB) belonging to the specified 
session.  The argument is first checked for validity.  If no argument is 
given, the current session, if any, is used.  This command should be used 
with caution since it does not inform the remote end that the connection 
no longer exists.  (In TCP, a reset (RST) message will be automatically 
generated should the remote TCP send anything after a local reset has been 
done.  In AX.25 the DM message performs a similar role.  Both are used to 
get rid of a lingering half-open connection after a remote system has 
crashed.)

6.3.35.  rosebash (obsolete)

A toggle command, initially off, that stuffs an IP PID into packets that 
arrive on virtual circuits over older versions of ROSE switches.  (Rose 
commands were replaced by vcircuit commands starting with NET version k15.  
See 6.3.48.  Don't use rosebash unless you have to.)

6.3.36.  route [add|drop]  (see below)

There are two major route commands, route add and route drop.

6.3.36.1.  route add <dest addr>[/bits]|default <interface> 
                [<gateway hostid> [<metric>]]

With no arguments, "route" displays the IP routing table.  "route add" 
adds an entry to the routing table, while "route drop" deletes an existing 
entry.  "route add" requires at least two more arguments, the host id of 
the target destination and the local name of the interface to which its 
packets should be sent.  If the destination is not local, the gateway's 
host id should also be specified.  (If the interface is a point-to-point 
link, then <gateway hostid> may be omitted even if the target is non-local 
because this field is only used to determine the gateway's link level 
address, if any.  If the destination is directly reachable, <gateway 
hostid> is also unnecessary since the destination address is used to 
determine the interface link address).  The host names contained in 
hosts.net can be used as well as the numeric host ids in these examples.

The optional "/bits" suffix to the destination host id specifies how many 
leading bits in the host id are to be considered significant in the 
routing comparisons.  If not specified, 32 bits (i.e., full significance) 
is assumed.  With this option, a single routing table entry may refer to 
many hosts all sharing a common bit string prefix in their IP addresses.  
For example, ARPA Class A, B and C networks would use suffixes of /8, /16 
and /24 respectively; the command

   route add [44]/8 sl0 [44.64.0.2]

causes any IP addresses beginning with "44" in the first 8 bits to be 
routed to [44.64.0.2]; the remaining 24 bits are "don't-cares".

When an IP address to be routed matches more than one entry in the routing 
table, the entry with largest "bits" parameter (i.e., the "best" match) is 
used.  This allows individual hosts or blocks of hosts to be exceptions to 
a more general rule for a larger block of hosts.

The special destination "default" is used to route datagrams to addresses 
not in the routing table; it is equivalent to specifying a /bits suffix of 
/0 to any destination hostid.  Care must be taken with default entries 
since two nodes with default entries pointing at each other will route 
packets to unknown addresses back and forth in a loop until their time-
to-live (TTL) fields expire.  (Routing loops for specific addresses can 
also be created, but this is less likely to occur accidentally).

Here are some more examples of using the route command:

 # Most typical, using ax0 and a KISS TNC
 route add default ax0

 # Station with IP address [44.0.0.10] on local AX.25 channel
 # needing an explicit route for some reason
 route add [44.0.0.10] ax0

 # Route datagrams to IP address 44.0.0.3 to SLIP line #0.
 # No gateway is needed because SLIP is point-to point.
 route add [44.0.0.3] sl0

 # Route packets to IP station [44.0.0.1] using the pseudo vcircuit 
 # interface, called "vc0"
 route add [44.0.0.1] vc0

 # Route all default traffic to the gateway on the local Ethernet
 # with IP address [44.0.0.1]
 route add default ec0 [44.0.0.1]

 # The local Ethernet has an ARPA Class-C address assignment;
 # route all IP addresses beginning with 192.4.8 to it
 route add [192.4.8]/24 ec0

Note:  The metric value is not used by NET.

6.3.36.2.  route drop <dest hostid>

"route drop" deletes an entry from the table.  If a packet arrives for the 
deleted address and a default route is in effect, the default will be 
used.

6.3.37.  session [<session #>]

Without arguments, displays the list of current sessions, including 
session number, remote TCP or AX.25 address and the address of the TCP or 
AX.25 control block.  An asterisk (*) is shown next to the "current" 
session; entering <cr> at this point will put you in converse mode with 
that session.  Entering a session number as an argument to the session 
command will put you in converse mode with that session.  If the telnet 
server is enabled, the user is notified of an incoming request and a 
session number is automatically assigned.  The user may then select the 
session normally to converse with the remote user as though the session 
had been locally initiated.

6.3.38.  shell (also Unix shell layer manager, shl)

If compiled with this option, shell (or !) suspends "net" and executes a 
sub shell ("command processor" under MS-DOS).  When the sub shell exits, 
net resumes (under MS-DOS, enter the "exit" command, under Unix, use 
"exit" or Ctrl-D).  Note that net is suspended during a shell escape but 
interrupts are not.  With so some of the communication drivers the results 
are unpredictable.  For this reason, shell is not normally compiled into 
net.  With MS-DOS, to enable multitasking it is preferable to run net 
under DESQview, DoubleDOS, or Windows.  For Unix, see 3.8 for shell layer 
manager information.  For Coherent, I recommend using the virtual terminal 
setup.  The "!" command is an alias for shell.  

6.3.39.  smtp

The following are the sub-commands for smtp:

6.3.39.1.  smtp gateway [<hostid>]

Displays or sets the host to be used as a "smart" mail relay.  Any mail 
sent to a hostid not in the host table will instead be sent to the gateway 
for forwarding.

6.3.39.2.  smtp kick

Run through the outgoing mail queue and attempt to deliver any pending 
mail.  This command is periodically invoked by a timer whenever net is 
running; this command allows the user to "kick" the mail system manually.  
(Note that if there was mail queued up and not sent when you exit net, 
there will be zero length files with .lck extension in the mqueue 
directory.  These mail messages won't go when net is restarted.  You will 
have to delete such .lck files.

6.3.39.3.  smtp maxclients [<val>]

Displays or sets the maximum number of simultaneous outgoing SMTP sessions 
that will be allowed.  The default is 10; reduce it if network congestion 
is a problem.

6.3.39.4.  smtp mode [queue|route]

Normally route.  Queue is used to stage messages in the rqueue sub-
directory so a mailing agent other than net and bm can deal with it.  
Typically a packet bbs program will take the messages and handle them.

6.3.39.5.  smtp timer [<val>]

Displays or sets the interval, in seconds, between scans of the outbound 
mail queue.  For example, "smtp timer 600" will cause the system to check 
for outgoing mail every 10 minutes and attempt to deliver anything it 
finds, subject of course to the "maxclients" limit.  Setting a value of 
zero disables queue scanning altogether, note that this is the default! 
This value is recommended for stand alone IP gateways that never handle 
mail, since it saves wear and tear on the floppy disk drive.  (What?  Who 
would run this thing on a floppy?)

6.3.39.6.  smtp trace [<value>]

Displays or sets the trace level in the SMTP client, allowing you to watch 
SMTP's conversations as it delivers mail.  Zero (the default) disables 
tracing.  There are four levels of tracing.  You get increasing level of 
detail by chosing values greater than 0, 1, 5, or 7, respectively.

.pa
6.3.40.  sokname

If compiled with the directive, SOKNAME, defined, sokname is available to 
toggle between showing socket names, ports, and IP users as names or as 
numbers.  This option affects the tcp stat command as well as telnet, 
finger, and other processes that show activity by process or user number 
or name.  Initially this information is shown as names.  (IP addresses in 
hosts.net must conform to the pattern, 44.78.0.2; not, 44.78.00.02, 
because sokname does a string pattern match.)  Toggle off to reduce disk 
activity.

6.3.41.  start <server name>

Starts the specified Internet server, allowing remote connection requests.  
(Servers: smtp, ftp, echo, discard, telnet, finger, telunix, etc.)

6.3.42.  stop <server name>

Stops the specified Internet server, rejecting any further remote connect 
requests.  Existing connections are allow to complete normally.

6.3.43.  tcp

The tcp sub-commands follow:

6.3.43.1.  tcp irtt [<val>]

Display or set the initial round trip time estimate, in seconds, to be 
used for new TCP connections until they can measure and adapt to the 
actual value.  The default is 5 seconds.  Increasing this when operating 
over slow channels will avoid the flurry of retransmissions that would 
otherwise occur as the smoothed estimate settles down at the correct 
value.  Note that this command should be given before servers are started 
in order for it to have effect on incoming connections.  (A more typical 
irtt value for autoexec.net or startup.net is 20000.)

6.3.43.2.  tcp kick <tcb_addr>

If there is data on the send queue of the specified tcb, this command 
forces an immediate retransmission.  Get the tcb address from the tcp 
status command.

Display or set the TCP Maximum Segment Size in bytes that will be sent on 
all outgoing TCP connect request (SYN segments).  This tells the remote 
end the size of the largest segment (packet) it may send.  Changing mss 
affects only future connections; existing connections are unaffected.  
Default is 512.  If you find a third party networking scheme that is in-
correctly handling fragmentation, use 216 for mss to allow 40 bytes for IP 
and TCP headers and prevent the fragmentation.

6.3.43.4.  tcp reset <tcb_addr>

Deletes the TCP control block at the specified address.

.pa
6.3.43.5.  tcp rtt <tcb_addr> <rttval>

Replaces the automatically computed round trip time in the specified tcb 
with the rttval in milliseconds.  This command is useful to speed up 
recovery from a series of lost packets since it provides a manual bypass 
around the normal backoff retransmission timing mechanisms.

6.3.43.6.  tcp status [<tcb_addr>]

Without arguments, displays several TCP-level statistics, plus a summary 
of all existing TCP connections, including TCB address, send and receive 
queue sizes, local and remote sockets, and connection state.

If <tcb_addr> is specified, a more detailed dump of the specified TCB is 
generated, including send and receive sequence numbers and timer 
information.  If using MS-DOS, only the last four hex numbers of the TCB 
address need be entered.  Using Unix, all eight characters are required.

6.3.43.6.1.  tcp timertype [linear | exponential] [<max backoff minutes>]

Displays or sets the method used to set the tcp retry backoff timer and 
the maximum value that it will back off too.  Default is exponential with 
a maximum backoff of 30 minutes.  Use shorter values if you are impatient 
and use longer values if it is likely that stations in your network are 
not on the air full time.  Performance difference between linear and 
exponential is insignificant in typical poor RF conditions.

6.3.43.7.  tcp window [<val>]

Displays or sets the receive window size in bytes to be used by TCP when 
creating new connections.  Existing connections are unaffected.  Default 
is 2048.  If you encounter fragmentation problems with third party net-
working schemes, set tcp win to 1080.  

6.3.44.  telnet <hostid> [well known socket]

In wire-line TCP/IP networks, Telnet by default normally starts a remote 
logon session with a remote host.  In NET, over amateur radio, Telnet, 
without arguments, creates a keyboard to keyboard chat session with the 
specified host and enters converse mode.  You can use either the host name 
contained in host.net, or the IP address (like 44.78.0.2).  Normally you 
won't use the "well known socket" number but some NET and NOS implementa
tions have strayed a bit from amateur radio philosophy (instead of using 
computers to augment amateur radio, they use amateur radio communications 
to augment a computer hobby.)  In the case of working with NOS stations 
you can avoid the logon and password ordeal by using, telnet w1aw 87.  87 
is the socket number used for "ttylink", a chat session in some versions 
of NOS.  If you want to log onto a Unix equipped station that has enabled 
telunix, use 513, the well known socket number I picked for the login 
process.  Thus telnet w1aw 513 spawns a login with "w1aw".

6.3.45.  trace [<interface> [<flags>]|allmode|cmdmode]

Controls packet tracing by the interface drivers.  Specific bits enable 
tracing of the various interfaces and the amount of information produced.  
Tracing is controlled on a per-interface basis; without arguments, trace 
gives a list of all defined interfaces and their tracing status.  Output 
can be limited to a single interface by specifying it, and the control 
flags can be change by specifying them as well.  The flags are given as a 
hexadecimal number which is interpreted as follows:

     T I O
     | | |--- Enable tracing of output packets if 1, disable if 0
     | |---- Enable tracing of input packets if 1, disable if 0
     |----- Controls type of tracing:

     0 - Protocol headers are decoded, but data is not displayed
     1 - Protocol headers are decoded, and data (but not the
         headers themselves) are displayed as ASCII characters,
         64 characters/line.  Unprintable characters are displayed
         as periods.
     2 - Protocol headers are decoded, and the entire packet
         (headers AND data) is also displayed in hexadecimal
         and ASCII, 16 characters per line.

There is an additional option for tracing, that allows you to select 
whether traced packets are always displayed, or only displayed when you 
are in command mode.  Having tracing only happen in command mode sometimes 
provides the right mix between "knowing what's going on", and "keeping the 
garbage off the screen" while you're typing.  To select tracing all the 
time (the default mode), use 'trace allmode'.  To restrict tracing to 
command mode, use 'trace cmdmode'.

6.3.46.  udp status

Displays the status of all UDP receive queues.

6.3.47.  upload [<filename>]

Opens <filename> and sends it on the current session as though it were
typed on the terminal.  Valid only on AX.25 and Telnet sessions.  When 
through, the program will send the message, "Uploading off".

6.3.48.  vcircuit [add|drop|attach]

The vcircuit command is used to manipulate incoming packets so you can use 
the ROSE transport scheme to send and receive IP datagrams.  IP stations 
on each end of a circuit must agree on the specific ROSE circuit and 
configure their ends in agreement with each other for IP datagrams from 
ROSE switches to be properly recognized and responded to.  The vcircuit 
add and drop commands are used to manage a table for incoming packets and 
the vcircuit attach command (in conjunction with arp add and route add) is 
used to manage outgoing packets.  (It is not necessary that packets going 
both directions between stations follow the same path.) The vcircuit 
command without arguments returns a table of IP station calls unless the 
table is empty.

6.3.48.1.  vcircuit add <remote IP call>

The vcircuit add command is used to add up to ten IP station calls to the 
virtual circuit table.  Use the remote IP station's AX.25 call, not his 
host name, in this command.  SSID of the distant station is significant.

An example of the vcircuit add command used to recognize packets from 
kb0qj-10 who will be coming in on a ROSE is:

   vcircuit add kb0qj-10

6.3.48.2.  vcircuit drop <remote IP call>

Vcircuit drop is used to drop a call from the virtual circuit table.  If a 
call had been added to table with the vcircuit add command example above, 
it would be dropped with:

   vcircuit drop kb0qj-10

6.3.48.3.  vcircuit attach <VC iface> <async iface>

If you want to use the ROSE transport method, and you don't want to 
dedicate your async interface to virtual circuit (VC, or "connected") 
mode, attach a pseudo virtual circuit interface, with the vc attach 
command.  The pseudo interface has almost all attributes of the 
asynchronous interface to which it is attached except it will send packets 
in the VC mode.  A maximum of four pseudo VC interfaces can be attached.

If you only have one async interface attached, called ax0, I you can 
simply use the command:

        vcircuit attach vc0 ax0

See Chapter 5 for more vcircuit attach examples.

(The vcircuit attach command causes some predictable side effects to other 
services using AX.25.  Some examples:  When tracing packets on an inter- 
face involved in the VC attach process, you must trace both the VC 
interface and the base interface because received packets will occasional- 
ly appear on the base interface; you will be unable to access the other 
stations's AX.25 mbox over the same route, using the "ax25 mycall", if 
vcircuit is enabled (You can use the mboxcall though); netrom should be 
attached to the vcircuit iface in preference to the natural iface, though 
you can attach to both, in which case netrom nodefilter commands must be 
duplicated and node broadcast would be sent twice, once on each interface.  
These side effects are not serious and are considered acceptable 
alternatives to adding gobs of code to achieve the marginal benefit of 
using ROSE.)

The name you choose for the VC interface is used in the "route add" 
command to cause outgoing packets to use VC.  Use the "arp add" command to 
specify the connect string to initiate a ROSE circuit to the destination 
station.

The vc add command can be used before the vc attach command but you will 
be warned that the vc is not yet attached.  Without the vc attach command, 
calls in the vc table will be ineffective.
